README.md, before:

# cpp-dump

[日本語記事はこちら！](https://zenn.dev/sassan/articles/19db660e4da0a4)

## Overview

cpp-dump is an all-round dump function library for C++ that supports even user-defined classes.

This library has the following features:

- Prints string representations of a wide variety of types to the standard error output (std::clog). This includes multidimensional arrays, (multi)maps, and (multi)sets, and even complex numbers, error objects, etc.
- Automatically indents so that the output fits into the maximum line width.
- Output is colored, and you can customize the colors.
- Header-only library, no build or dependencies required.
- The macro version can print variables along with the names.
- Can print even user-defined types by using macros.
- The string representation of variables is similar to JavaScript, Python, and C++ syntax.

## Introduction

cpp-dump has a macro version and a function version of dump functions.

### cpp_dump(expressions...) macro

The macro version dumps variable(s) along with the expression(s). [See Full Example Code](./readme/macro-version.cpp)

```cpp
std::vector<std::vector<int>> my_vector{{3, 5, 8, 9, 7}, {9, 3, 2, 3, 8}};
cpp_dump(my_vector);
```

![macro-version.png](./readme/macro-version.png)

### cpp_dump::dump(args...) function

The function version simply dumps variable(s). [See Full Example Code](./readme/function-version.cpp)

```cpp
std::vector<std::vector<int>> my_vector{{3, 5, 8, 9, 7}, {9, 3, 2, 3, 8}};
cpp_dump::dump(my_vector);
```

![function-version.png](./readme/function-version.png)

## Features

Both dump functions have the following features.

### A wide variety of supported types

[See All Supported Types](#supported-types)  
[See Full Example Code](./readme/supports-various-types.cpp)

```cpp
// See the full example code for the definitions of the variables.
std::clog << "\n// Basic Type" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(false, 0, 0.0, '0'); cpp_dump(true, 3.14, my_int, 9265);
cpp_dump("This is a string."); cpp_dump(ptr, void_ptr, nullptr);

std::clog << "\n// Container" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_vector);

std::clog << "\n// Set/Map" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_set); cpp_dump(my_map);

std::clog << "\n// Multiset/Multimap" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_multiset); cpp_dump(my_multimap);

std::clog << "\n// Tuple" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_tuple); cpp_dump(my_pair);

std::clog << "\n// FIFO/LIFO" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_queue); cpp_dump(my_priority_queue); cpp_dump(my_stack);

std::clog << "\n// Other" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_bitset); cpp_dump(my_complex);
cpp_dump(my_optional, std::nullopt); cpp_dump(my_variant);

std::clog << "\n// Combination" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(vector_of_pairs);
```

![supports-various-types.png](./readme/supports-various-types.png)

### Auto indent

Automatically indent so that the output does not exceed the maximum width. [See Full Example Code](./readme/auto-indent.cpp)

```cpp
cpp_dump(my_vector);
my_vector.push_back("This is a test string.");
cpp_dump(my_vector);
```

![Auto indent](./readme/auto-indent.png)

### Customizable output colors

The output color can be changed by assigning an escape sequence to a member of `cpp_dump::es_value`.  
[See Full Example Code](./readme/customizable-colors.cpp)

```cpp
// Use more colors
cpp_dump::es_value = {
  "\e[02m",  // log: dark
  "\e[34m",  // expression: blue
  "\e[36m",  // reserved: cyan
  "\e[36m",  // number: cyan
  "\e[36m",  // character: cyan
  "\e[02m",  // op: dark
  "\e[32m",  // identifier:  green
  "\e[36m",  // member: cyan
  "",        // unsupported: default
  {
    "\e[33m",  // bracket_by_depth[0]: yellow
    "\e[35m",  // bracket_by_depth[1]: magenta
    "\e[36m",  // bracket_by_depth[2]: cyan
  },
};
```

![customizable-colors.png](./readme/customizable-colors.png)

To turn off output coloring, assign `cpp_dump::es_style_t::no_es` to `cpp_dump::es_style`.  
[See Full Example Code](./readme/no-es.cpp)

```cpp
// Turn off output coloring
cpp_dump::es_style = cpp_dump::es_style_t::no_es;
```

![no-es.png](./readme/no-es.png)

### User-defined types can also be supported by using macros

#### User-defined class

[See Full Example Code](./readme/user-defined-class.cpp)

```cpp
//  At top level
struct class_A {
  int i;
  std::string str() const { return std::to_string(i); }
};
CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(class_A, i, str());

// In main() or some function
class_A my_class_A{10};
cpp_dump(my_class_A);
```

![user-defined-class.png](./readme/user-defined-class.png)

#### Enum

[See Full Example Code](./readme/user-defined-enum.cpp)

```cpp
//  At top level
enum class enum_A { a, b, c };
CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(enum_A, enum_A::a, enum_A::b, enum_A::c);

// In main() or some function
enum_A my_enum_A = enum_A::c;
cpp_dump(my_enum_A);
```

![user-defined-enum.png](./readme/user-defined-enum.png)

## Requirement

- C++17 or higher.
- No build or dependencies are required since cpp-dump is a header-only library.

## Installation

```shell
git clone https://github.com/philip82148/cpp-dump
```

or

```shell
git submodule add https://github.com/philip82148/cpp-dump
```

Then

```cpp
#include "path/to/cpp-dump/dump.hpp"
```

## Usage

### Functions

```cpp
/**
 * Output string representation(s) of variable(s) to std::clog.
 */
template <typename... Args>
void cpp_dump::dump(const Args &...args);

/**
 * Return a string representation of a variable.
 * cpp_dump() and cpp_dump::dump() use this function internally.
 */
template <typename T>
std::string cpp_dump::export_var(const T &value);

// Manipulators (See 'Formatting with manipulators' for details.)
cpp_dump::show_front(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_middle(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_back(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_both_ends(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::int_style(unsigned int base = 16, unsigned int digits = 8,
    unsigned int chunk = 2, bool space_fill = false, bool support_negative = false);
cpp_dump::int_style10(unsigned int digits, unsigned int chunk = 0);
cpp_dump::map_key(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_value(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_key_and_value(return_value_of_manipulator_for_key, return_value_of_manipulator_for_value);
```

### Macros

```cpp
/**
 * Output string representations of expression(s) and result(s) to std::clog.
 */
#define CPP_DUMP(expressions...)

/**
 * Output string representations of expression(s) and result(s) to std::clog.
 * This is an alias of CPP_DUMP(expressions...).
 */
#define cpp_dump(expressions...)

/**
 * Make export_var() support type T.
 * Member functions to be displayed must be const.
 */
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(T, members...)

/**
 * Make export_var() support enum T.
 */
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(T, members...)

/**
 * Set a value to a variable in cpp_dump namespace.
 * You can also assign values to the variables directly.
 * (See 'For competitive programming use' for details.)
 */
#define CPP_DUMP_SET_OPTION(variable, value)
```

### Variables

```cpp
/**
 * Maximum line width of output strings of cpp_dump::export_var().
 */
inline std::size_t cpp_dump::max_line_width = 160;

/**
 * Maximum number of times cpp_dump::export_var() is applied recursively.
 */
inline std::size_t cpp_dump::max_depth = 4;

/**
 * Maximum number of times cpp_dump::export_var() iterates over an iterator.
 * Note that in a single call, export_var() calls itself at most
 * (max_iteration_count^(max_depth+1)-1)/(max_iteration_count-1)-1 times.
 */
inline std::size_t cpp_dump::max_iteration_count = 16;

/**
 * Function that returns the label that cpp_dump::dump() and cpp_dump() print
 * at the beginning of the output.
 */
inline std::function<std::string(void)> cpp_dump::log_label_func = []() -> std::string { return "[dump] "; };

/**
 * Style of the escape sequences.
 */
inline cpp_dump::es_style_t cpp_dump::es_style = cpp_dump::es_style_t::by_syntax;

/**
 * Value of the escape sequences.
 */
inline cpp_dump::es_value_t cpp_dump::es_value = {
    "\e[02m",    // log: dark
    "\e[36m",    // expression: cyan
    "",          // reserved: default
    "",          // number: default
    "",          // character: default
    "\e[02m",    // op: dark
    "\e[32m",    // identifier: green
    "\e[36m",    // member: cyan
    "\e[31m",    // unsupported: red
    {"\e[02m"},  // bracket_by_depth[0]: dark
};
```

### Types

```cpp
/**
 * Type of cpp_dump::es_style.
 * cpp_dump::export_var() supports this type.
 */
enum class cpp_dump::es_style_t { no_es, by_syntax };

/**
 * Type of cpp_dump::es_value.
 * cpp_dump::export_var() supports this type.
 */
struct cpp_dump::es_value_t {
  std::string log;
  std::string expression;
  std::string reserved;
  std::string number;
  std::string character;
  std::string op;
  std::string identifier;
  std::string member;
  std::string unsupported;
  std::vector<std::string> bracket_by_depth;
  es_value_t(
    std::string log,
    std::string expression,
    std::string reserved,
    std::string number,
    std::string character,
    std::string op,
    std::string identifier,
    std::string member,
    std::string unsupported
    std::vector<std::string> bracket_by_depth,
  );
}
```

### Meta function

```cpp
/**
 * Check if export_var() supports type T (export_var() returns "Unsupported Type" if false).
 */
template <typename T>
inline constexpr bool cpp_dump::is_exportable;
```

### Formatting with manipulators

[See Full Example Code](./readme/formatting-with-manipulators.cpp)

Using manipulators, you can set which and how many elements of an array/map/set will be displayed.

```cpp
// Show the last 10 elements for the 1st dimension, the first 5 and the last 5 for the 2nd dimension.
cpp_dump(show_back(10) << show_both_ends(10) << some_huge_vector);
```

![some-huge-vector](./readme/omitting-a-vector.png)

And you can set how integers are displayed with manipulators.

```cpp
// Show integers in binary, minimum 8 digits, separated by every 2 characters.
cpp_dump(int_style(2, 8, 2) << show_front(5) << show_front(5) << some_huge_vector);
```

![int-style](./readme/int-style.png)

#### show\_\* manipulators

```cpp
cpp_dump::show_front(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_middle(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_back(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_both_ends(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);

// Example
cpp_dump(show_back() << show_back() << variable);
```

The further left manipulator will act on the more outside dimensions of the array/map/set.

#### int_style manipulator

```cpp
cpp_dump::int_style(unsigned int base = 16, unsigned int digits = 8,
    unsigned int chunk = 2, bool space_fill = false, bool support_negative = false);
cpp_dump::int_style10(unsigned int digits, unsigned int chunk = 0) { return int_style(10, digits, chunk, true, true); }

// Example
cpp_dump(int_style(16) << variable);
```

`base` supports values of 2 <= `base` <= 16. For other values, this manipulator resets the effects of the previous `int_style()` manipulators.  
`chunk/digits` supports values of `chunk/digits` >= 0.  
Unlike `show_*` manipulators, `int_style()` manipulator acts on all integers in the variable.  
`int_style10(digits, chunk)` is an alias of `int_style(10, digits, chunk, true, true)`

#### map_key, map_value, map_key_and_value manipulator

```cpp
cpp_dump::map_key(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_value(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_key_and_value(return_value_of_manipulator_for_key, return_value_of_manipulator_for_value);

// Example
cpp_dump(show_front() << map_key_and_value(int_style(16), show_back()) << map);
```

These manipulators act on (multi)maps.  
In this example, the keys are displayed in hexadecimal, and if the values are iterable, the front part of the values is omitted.

### For competitive programming use

```cpp
#ifdef DEFINED_ONLY_IN_LOCAL
#include "./cpp-dump/dump.hpp"
// #include "./cpp-dump/external/atcoder.hpp" // Include this instead of the above if you use AtCoder Library
#define dump(...) cpp_dump(__VA_ARGS__)
#else
#define dump(...)
#define CPP_DUMP_SET_OPTION(...)
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(...)
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(...)
#endif

#include <bits/stdc++.h>

#define rep(i, n) for (int i = 0; i < (int)(n); ++i)

using namespace std;

int main() {
  CPP_DUMP_SET_OPTION(max_line_width, 80);

  int N;
  cin >> N;

  vector<int> X(N);
  rep(i, N) { cin >> X[i]; }
  dump(X);

  // To be continued...
}
```

Then

```shell
g++ ./main.cpp -D DEFINED_ONLY_IN_LOCAL
```

or

```shell
clang++ ./main.cpp -D DEFINED_ONLY_IN_LOCAL
```

## Supported types

Both dump functions dump variables recursively, so they can dump nested variables of any combination of types in the table below.

| Category     | Type T is supported if ...                                                                                                                                         | Example                                           |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| Arithmetic   | `std::is_arithmetic_v<T> == true`                                                                                                                                  | `bool`, `char`, `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`  |
| String       | T is convertible to `std::string_view`                                                                                                                             | `std::string`, `const char *`, `std::string_view` |
| Container    | T is compatible with the range-based for loop                                                                                                                      | `std::vector`, `std::array`, C-style arrays       |
| Map          | T is either `std::map`, `std::unordered_map`, `std::multimap`, or `std::unordered_multimap`                                                                        |                                                   |
| Set          | T is either `std::set`, `std::unordered_set`, `std::multiset`, or `std::unordered_multiset`                                                                        |                                                   |
| Tuple        | T is compatible with `std::tuple_size_v<T>`                                                                                                                        | `std::tuple`, `std::pair`                         |
| FIFO/LIFO    | T is either `std::queue`, `std::priority_queue`, or `std::stack`                                                                                                   |                                                   |
| Pointer      | T is a pointer or smart pointer                                                                                                                                    | `int *`, `std::shared_ptr`, `std::unique_ptr`     |
| Reference    | T is `std::reference_wrapper`                                                                                                                                      |                                                   |
| Exception    | T is convertible to `std::exception`                                                                                                                               |                                                   |
| Other        | T is either `std::bitset`, `std::complex`, `std::optional`, or `std::variant`                                                                                      |                                                   |
| User-defined | `CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(T, members...);` is at top level and the member functions to be displayed is const.                                                 |                                                   |
| Enum         | `CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(T, members...);` is at top level.                                                                                                     |                                                   |
| Asterisk     | All of the above are not satisfied and the function `TypeExceptT operator*(const T &)` or the const member function `TypeExceptT T::operator*() const` is defined. | Iterators                                         |

### Display example

See also the image in the section ["A wide variety of supported types"](#a-wide-variety-of-supported-types).

```console
# Arithmatic
true, 'c', 1, 3.140000

# String
"A normal string"
`A string with '"' or newline(s)`

# Container
[ value1, value2, ... ]

# Map
{ key1: value1, key2: value2, ... },
{ key1 (multiplicity1): [ value1a, value1b, ... ], key2 (multiplicity2): [ ... ], ... }

# Set
{ value1, value2, ... },
{ value1 (multiplicity1), value2 (multiplicity2), ... }

# Tuple
( value1, value2, ... )

# FIFO/LIFO
std::queue{ front()= value, size()= integer }

# Pointer
*value
nullptr
0x7fff2246c4d8
# (The address will be displayed when the pointer type is void * or the type the pointer points to is not supported.)

# Reference
true, 'c', 1, 3.140000
# (No change)

# Exception
std::logic_error{ what()= "Error Message" }

# Asterisk
*value
```

For other categories, see the image in the section...

Other -> [A wide variety of supported types](#a-wide-variety-of-supported-types)  
User-defined -> [User-defined class](#user-defined-class)  
Enum -> [Enum](#enum)

Commit message:

Add support for std::ostream&<<(const T &) (#11)
* add is_ostream<>

* add export_ostream()

* add ostream_able_class to dump test

* update unsupported_non_const_class in dump test

* update README.md

README.md, after:

# cpp-dump

[日本語記事はこちら！](https://zenn.dev/sassan/articles/19db660e4da0a4)

## Overview

cpp-dump is an all-round dump function library for C++ that supports even user-defined classes.

This library has the following features:

- Prints string representations of a wide variety of types to the standard error output (std::clog). This includes multidimensional arrays, (multi)maps, and (multi)sets, and even complex numbers, error objects, etc.
- Automatically indents so that the output fits into the maximum line width.
- Output is colored, and you can customize the colors.
- Header-only library, no build or dependencies required.
- The macro version can print variables along with the names.
- Can print even user-defined types by using macros.
- The string representation of variables is similar to JavaScript, Python, and C++ syntax.

## Introduction

cpp-dump has a macro version and a function version of dump functions.

### cpp_dump(expressions...) macro

The macro version dumps variable(s) along with the expression(s). [See Full Example Code](./readme/macro-version.cpp)

```cpp
std::vector<std::vector<int>> my_vector{{3, 5, 8, 9, 7}, {9, 3, 2, 3, 8}};
cpp_dump(my_vector);
```

![macro-version.png](./readme/macro-version.png)

### cpp_dump::dump(args...) function

The function version simply dumps variable(s). [See Full Example Code](./readme/function-version.cpp)

```cpp
std::vector<std::vector<int>> my_vector{{3, 5, 8, 9, 7}, {9, 3, 2, 3, 8}};
cpp_dump::dump(my_vector);
```

![function-version.png](./readme/function-version.png)

## Features

Both dump functions have the following features.

### A wide variety of supported types

[See All Supported Types](#supported-types)  
[See Full Example Code](./readme/supports-various-types.cpp)

```cpp
// See the full example code for the definitions of the variables.
std::clog << "\n// Basic Type" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(false, 0, 0.0, '0'); cpp_dump(true, 3.14, my_int, 9265);
cpp_dump("This is a string."); cpp_dump(ptr, void_ptr, nullptr);

std::clog << "\n// Container" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_vector);

std::clog << "\n// Set/Map" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_set); cpp_dump(my_map);

std::clog << "\n// Multiset/Multimap" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_multiset); cpp_dump(my_multimap);

std::clog << "\n// Tuple" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_tuple); cpp_dump(my_pair);

std::clog << "\n// FIFO/LIFO" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_queue); cpp_dump(my_priority_queue); cpp_dump(my_stack);

std::clog << "\n// Other" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(my_bitset); cpp_dump(my_complex);
cpp_dump(my_optional, std::nullopt); cpp_dump(my_variant);

std::clog << "\n// Combination" << std::endl;
cpp_dump(vector_of_pairs);
```

![supports-various-types.png](./readme/supports-various-types.png)

### Auto indent

Automatically indent so that the output does not exceed the maximum width. [See Full Example Code](./readme/auto-indent.cpp)

```cpp
cpp_dump(my_vector);
my_vector.push_back("This is a test string.");
cpp_dump(my_vector);
```

![Auto indent](./readme/auto-indent.png)

### Customizable output colors

The output color can be changed by assigning an escape sequence to a member of `cpp_dump::es_value`.  
[See Full Example Code](./readme/customizable-colors.cpp)

```cpp
// Use more colors
cpp_dump::es_value = {
  "\e[02m",  // log: dark
  "\e[34m",  // expression: blue
  "\e[36m",  // reserved: cyan
  "\e[36m",  // number: cyan
  "\e[36m",  // character: cyan
  "\e[02m",  // op: dark
  "\e[32m",  // identifier:  green
  "\e[36m",  // member: cyan
  "",        // unsupported: default
  {
    "\e[33m",  // bracket_by_depth[0]: yellow
    "\e[35m",  // bracket_by_depth[1]: magenta
    "\e[36m",  // bracket_by_depth[2]: cyan
  },
};
```

![customizable-colors.png](./readme/customizable-colors.png)

To turn off output coloring, assign `cpp_dump::es_style_t::no_es` to `cpp_dump::es_style`.  
[See Full Example Code](./readme/no-es.cpp)

```cpp
// Turn off output coloring
cpp_dump::es_style = cpp_dump::es_style_t::no_es;
```

![no-es.png](./readme/no-es.png)

### User-defined types can also be supported by using macros

One way to support user-types is to define the operator `std::ostream& operator<<(std::ostream&, const T &)`.  
The other way is to use macros, which can be done more easily.

#### User-defined class

[See Full Example Code](./readme/user-defined-class.cpp)

```cpp
//  At top level
struct class_A {
  int i;
  std::string str() const { return std::to_string(i); }
};
CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(class_A, i, str());

// In main() or some function
class_A my_class_A{10};
cpp_dump(my_class_A);
```

![user-defined-class.png](./readme/user-defined-class.png)

#### Enum

[See Full Example Code](./readme/user-defined-enum.cpp)

```cpp
//  At top level
enum class enum_A { a, b, c };
CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(enum_A, enum_A::a, enum_A::b, enum_A::c);

// In main() or some function
enum_A my_enum_A = enum_A::c;
cpp_dump(my_enum_A);
```

![user-defined-enum.png](./readme/user-defined-enum.png)

## Requirement

- C++17 or higher.
- No build or dependencies are required since cpp-dump is a header-only library.

## Installation

```shell
git clone https://github.com/philip82148/cpp-dump
```

or

```shell
git submodule add https://github.com/philip82148/cpp-dump
```

Then

```cpp
#include "path/to/cpp-dump/dump.hpp"
```

## Usage

### Functions

```cpp
/**
 * Output string representation(s) of variable(s) to std::clog.
 */
template <typename... Args>
void cpp_dump::dump(const Args &...args);

/**
 * Return a string representation of a variable.
 * cpp_dump() and cpp_dump::dump() use this function internally.
 */
template <typename T>
std::string cpp_dump::export_var(const T &value);

// Manipulators (See 'Formatting with manipulators' for details.)
cpp_dump::show_front(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_middle(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_back(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_both_ends(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::int_style(unsigned int base = 16, unsigned int digits = 8,
    unsigned int chunk = 2, bool space_fill = false, bool support_negative = false);
cpp_dump::int_style10(unsigned int digits, unsigned int chunk = 0);
cpp_dump::map_key(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_value(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_key_and_value(return_value_of_manipulator_for_key, return_value_of_manipulator_for_value);
```

### Macros

```cpp
/**
 * Output string representations of expression(s) and result(s) to std::clog.
 */
#define CPP_DUMP(expressions...)

/**
 * Output string representations of expression(s) and result(s) to std::clog.
 * This is an alias of CPP_DUMP(expressions...).
 */
#define cpp_dump(expressions...)

/**
 * Make export_var() support type T.
 * Member functions to be displayed must be const.
 */
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(T, members...)

/**
 * Make export_var() support enum T.
 */
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(T, members...)

/**
 * Set a value to a variable in cpp_dump namespace.
 * You can also assign values to the variables directly.
 * (See 'For competitive programming use' for details.)
 */
#define CPP_DUMP_SET_OPTION(variable, value)
```

### Variables

```cpp
/**
 * Maximum line width of output strings of cpp_dump::export_var().
 */
inline std::size_t cpp_dump::max_line_width = 160;

/**
 * Maximum number of times cpp_dump::export_var() is applied recursively.
 */
inline std::size_t cpp_dump::max_depth = 4;

/**
 * Maximum number of times cpp_dump::export_var() iterates over an iterator.
 * Note that in a single call, export_var() calls itself at most
 * (max_iteration_count^(max_depth+1)-1)/(max_iteration_count-1)-1 times.
 */
inline std::size_t cpp_dump::max_iteration_count = 16;

/**
 * Function that returns the label that cpp_dump::dump() and cpp_dump() print
 * at the beginning of the output.
 */
inline std::function<std::string(void)> cpp_dump::log_label_func = []() -> std::string { return "[dump] "; };

/**
 * Style of the escape sequences.
 */
inline cpp_dump::es_style_t cpp_dump::es_style = cpp_dump::es_style_t::by_syntax;

/**
 * Value of the escape sequences.
 */
inline cpp_dump::es_value_t cpp_dump::es_value = {
    "\e[02m",    // log: dark
    "\e[36m",    // expression: cyan
    "",          // reserved: default
    "",          // number: default
    "",          // character: default
    "\e[02m",    // op: dark
    "\e[32m",    // identifier: green
    "\e[36m",    // member: cyan
    "\e[31m",    // unsupported: red
    {"\e[02m"},  // bracket_by_depth[0]: dark
};
```

### Types

```cpp
/**
 * Type of cpp_dump::es_style.
 * cpp_dump::export_var() supports this type.
 */
enum class cpp_dump::es_style_t { no_es, by_syntax };

/**
 * Type of cpp_dump::es_value.
 * cpp_dump::export_var() supports this type.
 */
struct cpp_dump::es_value_t {
  std::string log;
  std::string expression;
  std::string reserved;
  std::string number;
  std::string character;
  std::string op;
  std::string identifier;
  std::string member;
  std::string unsupported;
  std::vector<std::string> bracket_by_depth;
  es_value_t(
    std::string log,
    std::string expression,
    std::string reserved,
    std::string number,
    std::string character,
    std::string op,
    std::string identifier,
    std::string member,
    std::string unsupported
    std::vector<std::string> bracket_by_depth,
  );
}
```

### Meta function

```cpp
/**
 * Check if export_var() supports type T (export_var() returns "Unsupported Type" if false).
 */
template <typename T>
inline constexpr bool cpp_dump::is_exportable;
```

### Formatting with manipulators

[See Full Example Code](./readme/formatting-with-manipulators.cpp)

Using manipulators, you can set which and how many elements of an array/map/set will be displayed.

```cpp
// Show the last 10 elements for the 1st dimension, the first 5 and the last 5 for the 2nd dimension.
cpp_dump(show_back(10) << show_both_ends(10) << some_huge_vector);
```

![some-huge-vector](./readme/omitting-a-vector.png)

And you can set how integers are displayed with manipulators.

```cpp
// Show integers in binary, minimum 8 digits, separated by every 2 characters.
cpp_dump(int_style(2, 8, 2) << show_front(5) << show_front(5) << some_huge_vector);
```

![int-style](./readme/int-style.png)

#### show\_\* manipulators

```cpp
cpp_dump::show_front(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_middle(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_back(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);
cpp_dump::show_both_ends(std::size_t iteration_count = cpp_dump::max_iteration_count);

// Example
cpp_dump(show_back() << show_back() << variable);
```

The further left manipulator will act on the more outside dimensions of the array/map/set.

#### int_style manipulator

```cpp
cpp_dump::int_style(unsigned int base = 16, unsigned int digits = 8,
    unsigned int chunk = 2, bool space_fill = false, bool support_negative = false);
cpp_dump::int_style10(unsigned int digits, unsigned int chunk = 0) { return int_style(10, digits, chunk, true, true); }

// Example
cpp_dump(int_style(16) << variable);
```

`base` supports values of 2 <= `base` <= 16. For other values, this manipulator resets the effects of the previous `int_style()` manipulators.  
`chunk/digits` supports values of `chunk/digits` >= 0.  
Unlike `show_*` manipulators, `int_style()` manipulator acts on all integers in the variable.  
`int_style10(digits, chunk)` is an alias of `int_style(10, digits, chunk, true, true)`

#### map_key, map_value, map_key_and_value manipulator

```cpp
cpp_dump::map_key(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_value(return_value_of_manipulator);
cpp_dump::map_key_and_value(return_value_of_manipulator_for_key, return_value_of_manipulator_for_value);

// Example
cpp_dump(show_front() << map_key_and_value(int_style(16), show_back()) << map);
```

These manipulators act on (multi)maps.  
In this example, the keys are displayed in hexadecimal, and if the values are iterable, the front part of the values is omitted.

### For competitive programming use

```cpp
#ifdef DEFINED_ONLY_IN_LOCAL
#include "./cpp-dump/dump.hpp"
// #include "./cpp-dump/external/atcoder.hpp" // Include this instead of the above if you use AtCoder Library
#define dump(...) cpp_dump(__VA_ARGS__)
#else
#define dump(...)
#define CPP_DUMP_SET_OPTION(...)
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(...)
#define CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(...)
#endif

#include <bits/stdc++.h>

#define rep(i, n) for (int i = 0; i < (int)(n); ++i)

using namespace std;

int main() {
  CPP_DUMP_SET_OPTION(max_line_width, 80);

  int N;
  cin >> N;

  vector<int> X(N);
  rep(i, N) { cin >> X[i]; }
  dump(X);

  // To be continued...
}
```

Then

```shell
g++ ./main.cpp -D DEFINED_ONLY_IN_LOCAL
```

or

```shell
clang++ ./main.cpp -D DEFINED_ONLY_IN_LOCAL
```

## Supported types

Both dump functions dump variables recursively, so they can dump nested variables of any combination of types in the table below.

| Category     | Type T is supported if ...                                                                                                                                         | Example                                           |
| ------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------- |
| Arithmetic   | `std::is_arithmetic_v<T> == true`                                                                                                                                  | `bool`, `char`, `int`, `long`, `float`, `double`  |
| String       | T is convertible to `std::string_view`                                                                                                                             | `std::string`, `const char *`, `std::string_view` |
| Container    | T is compatible with the range-based for loop                                                                                                                      | `std::vector`, `std::array`, C-style arrays       |
| Map          | T is either `std::map`, `std::unordered_map`, `std::multimap`, or `std::unordered_multimap`                                                                        |                                                   |
| Set          | T is either `std::set`, `std::unordered_set`, `std::multiset`, or `std::unordered_multiset`                                                                        |                                                   |
| Tuple        | T is compatible with `std::tuple_size_v<T>`                                                                                                                        | `std::tuple`, `std::pair`                         |
| FIFO/LIFO    | T is either `std::queue`, `std::priority_queue`, or `std::stack`                                                                                                   |                                                   |
| Pointer      | T is a pointer or smart pointer                                                                                                                                    | `int *`, `std::shared_ptr`, `std::unique_ptr`     |
| Reference    | T is `std::reference_wrapper`                                                                                                                                      |                                                   |
| Exception    | T is convertible to `std::exception`                                                                                                                               |                                                   |
| Other        | T is either `std::bitset`, `std::complex`, `std::optional`, or `std::variant`                                                                                      |                                                   |
| User-defined | `CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_OBJECT(T, members...);` is at top level and the member functions to be displayed is const.                                                 |                                                   |
| Enum         | `CPP_DUMP_DEFINE_EXPORT_ENUM(T, members...);` is at top level.                                                                                                     |                                                   |
| Asterisk     | All of the above are not satisfied and the function `TypeExceptT operator*(const T &)` or the const member function `TypeExceptT T::operator*() const` is defined. | Iterators                                         |
| Ostream      | All of the above are not satisfied and the function `std::ostream& operator<<(std::ostream&, const T &)` is defined.                                               |                                                   |

### Display example

See also the image in the section ["A wide variety of supported types"](#a-wide-variety-of-supported-types).

```console
# Arithmatic
true, 'c', 1, 3.140000

# String
"A normal string"
`A string with '"' or newline(s)`

# Container
[ value1, value2, ... ]

# Map
{ key1: value1, key2: value2, ... },
{ key1 (multiplicity1): [ value1a, value1b, ... ], key2 (multiplicity2): [ ... ], ... }

# Set
{ value1, value2, ... },
{ value1 (multiplicity1), value2 (multiplicity2), ... }

# Tuple
( value1, value2, ... )

# FIFO/LIFO
std::queue{ front()= value, size()= integer }

# Pointer
*value
nullptr
0x7fff2246c4d8
# (The address will be displayed when the pointer type is void * or the type the pointer points to is not supported.)

# Reference
true, 'c', 1, 3.140000
# (No change)

# Exception
std::logic_error{ what()= "Error Message" }

# Asterisk
*value
```

For other categories, see the image in the section...

Other -> [A wide variety of supported types](#a-wide-variety-of-supported-types)  
User-defined -> [User-defined class](#user-defined-class)  
Enum -> [Enum](#enum)
